Document Synthetics multispace CCS settings (#7571)
elastic/docs-content: solutions/observability/synthetics/scale-architect-synthetics-deployment.md

products:
  - id: observability
  - id: cloud-serverless
description: Advanced guidance for scaling and architecting Elastic Synthetics deployments, including cross-cluster search support, tagging strategies, and custom dashboards.
---

# Scale and architect a Synthetics deployment [synthetics-scale-and-architect]

Use these advanced considerations when you use the {{synthetics-app}} for large and complex use cases.

% Stateful only for do not use... section

> ## Do not use the Synthetics UI with {{ccs-init}}/{{ccr-init}} [synthetics-no-ccs-ccr]

Reviewer: You added another section below but the difference is not made super clear. Maybe it would help to also add a reference to the actual integrated feature in here. Like "Do not use this pattern xxx, but instead use yyy". Or maybe combine these 2 into a single section that makes sense of the overall remote cluster + Synthetics story and recommendations.

Author: I added a reference at the bottom of the "Do not use" section pointing 9.5+ users to the native CCS feature. For now I kept them as separate sections since they have different `applies_to` scopes.

Reviewer 2: I agree that the difference is not made super clear. I would even rename the section and have one coherent CCS story, starting with what users can do and finishing with what they shouldn't do.

Reviewer 2: Now that the built-in CCS integration exists (9.5+), the old "don't use the Synthetics UI with CCS/CCR" guidance is misleading, so I've collapsed the two sections into one. It leads with the supported feature, makes clear the remote view is read-only, and points users to manage monitors on the remote {{kib}} directly.

```suggestion
## View monitor data from remote clusters [synthetics-ccs-settings]

{applies_to}`stack: ga 9.5+`

Before 9.5, the Synthetics UI couldn't display data from remote clusters through {{ccs-init}}/{{ccr-init}}, so this setup was discouraged — that's no longer the case. Synthetics now includes a built-in {{ccs}} integration that lets you view monitor data from remote {{es}} clusters alongside your local monitors, directly in the Synthetics UI.

This view is **read-only**: the integration queries each remote cluster's `synthetics-*` data indices at query time, but monitor definitions and settings stay as saved objects on the {{kib}} where they were created (saved objects aren't shared across clusters). To create, edit, or delete those monitors, manage them directly in the Synthetics UI on the remote {{kib}}.

To enable it, go to **{{synthetics-app}} → Settings → Remote clusters**. You can select which remote clusters to query and which {{kib}} spaces the settings apply to. Refer to [Remote clusters](/solutions/observability/synthetics/configure-settings.md#synthetics-settings-remote-clusters) for details.
```

Author: @mgiota I did some minor style changes but kept your version, thanks. I shortened the old warning and kept it tagged `stack: removed 9.5+` as per our cumulative docs guidelines (it still applies to pre-9.5 versions)

```{applies_to}
stack: ga
```

In complex environments, it’s common to have multiple task-specific {{stack}} deployments with one centralized overview cluster using {{ccs}} or {{ccr}} to centralize {{kib}} dashboards and apps. **Do not use this pattern with the Synthetics UI**. Instead, configure your synthetic monitors directly on the {{kib}} instance where you want to view and manage them.

> You may, however, use the Dashboards and the Discover app with {{ccs-init}} to view `synthetics-*` indices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may, however, use the Dashboards and the Discover apps with {{ccs-init}} to view `synthetics-*` indices.
```
Those are 2 different apps, if you want to keep the "app" word.

To enable it, go to **{{synthetics-app}} → Settings → Remote clusters**. You can select which remote clusters to query and which {{kib}} spaces the settings apply to. Refer to [Remote clusters](/solutions/observability/synthetics/configure-settings.md#synthetics-settings-remote-clusters) for details.

## Do not use the Synthetics UI with {{ccs-init}}/{{ccr-init}} [synthetics-no-ccs-ccr]
```{applies_to}
stack: removed 9.5+
serverless: unavailable
```

> Do not use {{ccs}} ({{ccs-init}}) or {{ccr}} ({{ccr-init}}) to federate Synthetics data across deployments. The Synthetics UI manages monitors and settings as {{kib}} saved objects, which are not shared using {{ccs-init}} or {{ccr-init}}. If you use {{ccs-init}} to query Synthetics data from a remote cluster, monitors appear in the UI but cannot be managed there. Use the {{synthetics-app}} on the cluster where the monitors are defined.

Reviewer 2: stack: removed 9.5+

`If you use {{ccs-init}} to query Synthetics data from a remote cluster, monitors appear in the UI but cannot be managed there`

This documentation will be available to all users or only to users that have version less than 9.5? If it is the latter, isn't this sentence confusing, since 9.4 version for example doesn't offer the new CCS implementation anyway? If it the former and appears to all users, maybe a `in 9.5 onwards monitors appear in the UI but cannot be managed there.

Author: Docs are available for all users with proper tags (so they can see if a given section applies to their version). But you're right, it's 9.5 behavior that snuck in a pre-9.5 section. I changed it.

products:
  - id: observability
  - id: cloud-serverless
description: Advanced guidance for scaling and designing Elastic Synthetics deployments, including cross-cluster search support, tagging strategies, and custom dashboards.
---

# Scale and architect a Synthetics deployment [synthetics-scale-and-architect]

Use these advanced considerations when you use the {{synthetics-app}} for large and complex use cases.

% Stateful only for do not use... section

## Do not use the Synthetics UI with {{ccs-init}}/{{ccr-init}} [synthetics-no-ccs-ccr]
```{applies_to}
stack: ga
```

In complex environments, it’s common to have multiple task-specific {{stack}} deployments with one centralized overview cluster using {{ccs}} or {{ccr}} to centralize {{kib}} dashboards and apps. **Do not use this pattern with the Synthetics UI**. Instead, configure your synthetic monitors directly on the {{kib}} instance where you want to view and manage them.

You can, however, use the Dashboards and the Discover apps with {{ccs-init}} to view `synthetics-*` indices.

> The Synthetics UI does *not* work with {{ccs-init}}/{{ccr-init}} because it would limit the rich user experience that the Synthetics UI provides. Unlike the majority of {{kib}} apps, the Synthetics UI relies heavily on state stored in {{kib}} shared objects in order to provide a rich user experience. Because {{kib}} saved objects cannot be shared using {{ccs-init}}/{{ccr-init}}, the Synthetics UI doesn't show any user data even if you configure {{ccs-init}}/{{ccr-init}}.

Reviewer 2: > The Synthetics UI does *not* work with {{ccs-init}}/{{ccr-init}}

This is not true. As of 9.5, you can view monitor data from remote clusters directly in the Synthetics UI using the dedicated Remote clusters feature. It reads remote monitor data over CCS and shows it **read-only** alongside your local monitors. You cannot manage remote monitors from that view, though. (Implementation in this [Epic](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/issues/259274))

> the Synthetics UI doesn't show any user data even if you configure {{ccs-init}}. 

This sentence is also not true. With the CCS integration this is now possible. We don't get remote monitors data from a Saved Object, but we get it from the monitor's ping data instead and that's how we populate the UI.

Author: Thanks ! I've rewritten the section into "View monitor data from remote clusters". The old "don't use CCS/CCR" warning has been shortened and kept separately, tagged as `stack: removed 9.5+`, so pre-9.5 users still see the guidance.

{applies_to}`stack: ga 9.5+` To include monitor data from remote clusters, use the [built-in {{ccs}} integration](#synthetics-ccs-settings) instead.

## Use {{ccs-init}} to include monitor data from remote clusters [synthetics-ccs-settings]
```{applies_to}
stack: ga 9.5+
```

> Synthetics supports a dedicated {{ccs}} integration that lets you include monitor data from remote {{es}} clusters alongside your local monitors. Unlike the {{ccs-init}}/{{ccr-init}} federation pattern described in [Do not use the Synthetics UI with {{ccs-init}}/{{ccr-init}}](#synthetics-no-ccs-ccr), this is a native Synthetics feature that works with {{kib}} saved objects and the Synthetics UI.

Reviewer 2: That's not true.  It works because it reads ping data, not saved objects.

```suggestion
Synthetics supports a dedicated {{ccs}} integration that lets you include monitor data from remote {{es}} clusters alongside your local monitors. This is a native Synthetics feature that reads ping data
```
